---
title:  "Studying Lobbying Influence in the European Parliament using Twitter data"
layout: post
---

Under construction.

This project was made as part of the course [CS-401 Machine Learning](https://edu.epfl.ch/coursebook/en/machine-learning-CS-433) at EPFL (fall 2021). Unclear relationships between politicians and lob-byists are a problem in a democratic political framework. Usingvarious  methods,  we  attempt  to  detect  links  between  Twitter activity  of  Members  of  the  European  Parliament  and  lobbygroups. 

Special thanks to my teammates Kamil Czerniak and Mohamed Allouch. I would like to acredit our supervisor, Aswin Suresh and the [Information and Network Dynamics Lab](https://indy.epfl.ch/) for making this project possible.
Under construction!

---

TODO:

# The dataset

## Contstructing the tweet graph

The   dataset   contains   tweets   of   677   Members   of   the European  Parliament  (MEPs)  of  8th  term  (2014-2019)  and 3024  lobby  groups,  alongside  metadata  related  to  tweetsand referenced tweets. A tweet can be referenced by eitherrepublishing  it  without  comment  (retweet),  republishing  itwith  a  comment  (quote  retweet)  or  replying  to  it.  As  thedataset contains all tweets made by given users in the years2014-2019, we also have a lot of tweets that do not refer toanyone  or  refer  to  accounts  outside  of  our  interest  (in  this situation:  MEP  accounts  for  lobby  tweets  and  vice  versa). On this base, the retweet graph has been built as follows:

- The tweet must have originated from an MEP accountand referenced a lobby account or the tweet must have originated  from  a  lobby  account  and  referenced  an MEP account
- When such a tweet is found, we create two nodes in the  graph  (if  they  do  not  exist  already),  named  after Twitter  handles  of  both  tweet  creator  and  referenced person. We create an edge between the nodes.

## Preprocessing the tweets

We restricted ourselves for English-language tweets, mak-ing  5143438  observations  in  total.  The  dataset  consists  oftwo  parts,  there  are  474361  tweets  from  Members  of  theEuropean  Parliament  and  4669077  tweets  from  lobbies.The  mean  character  length  of  the  tweets  is  132.42  with  astandard deviation of 60.92. Firstly preprocessed the textual data  using  the  Natural  Language  Toolkit  (nltk)  library. The preprocessing pipeline consists of case-folding, lemmatization,  tokenization,  stopword,  and  punctuation  removal. A  popular  idea  in  machine  learning  is  to  represent  wordsby  vectors  this  technique  is  called  embedding.  The  mainadvantage of pre-trained embeddings is that they can be usedfor basically any desired ML algorithm. We decided to use fastText for this step in our pipeline, which produces aword  embedding  of 300 dimensions.  The  embedding  of  a tweet is given by the sum of the embeddings of the words in it.


# Link prediction on the tweet graph
 
 Our goal is to build a machine learning model that, basedon  the  tweets  of  two  users,  can  accurately  predict  if  aretweet link exists between them. Given 580 MEPs and 1731 lobbyists,  there  are  1003980  possible  retweet  link  but  weonly observed 13632 actual links, which means our datasetis  really  unbalanced. 
 
 ## Inner product classifier
 First we use  a  classical  supervised  binary classification approach. We consider each MEP-lobby pair a training example let us denote the set of MEPs with $\huge{U}$ and the set of lobby groups with the set $\huge{V}$. The tweet embeddings are given by the matrices $\huge{X_u \in \mathbb{R}^{d_u \times 300}}$ and $\huge{X_v\in \mathbb{R}^{d_v \times 300}}$, where $\huge{d_u}$ and $huge{d_v}$ are the number of tweets of the user.
 


